
Shiny app accompanying the manuscript "The inflammatome: A meta-analysis of human genes regulated during inflammation"

Available online: https://oana-palasca.shinyapps.io/inflammatome_shinyapp

Try the app locally by running the following code in R:

```
install.packages("shiny")
library(shiny)

runGitHub("inflammatome_shinyapp", "opalasca")
```

The app implements a collection of functions that can be used to assess the presence of inflammation, by exploring differential expression analysis results in transcriptomics or proteomics datasets. 
The analysis is based on a set of 2000 genes that are found to be generally upregulated in inflammatory conditions, the "inflammatome", as well as a core set of 100 genes, the "inflammation signature". 
The inflammatome genes were identified by performing a meta-analysis of publicly available case-control transcriptomics data from diseases involving inflammation. A ranked list of genes was generated by combining 
differential expression results between disease and control across multiple datasets. The inflammatome genes were selected as top 2000 genes in this list, and the inflammation signature, as top 100. 

The app helps to assess to what extent inflammation genes are upregulated when comparing two conditions:
- Gene set enrichment analysis and visualisation: inflammatomeR helps in assessing the enrichment of the inflammation signature as well as other inflammation-related gene sets within a ranked list of results from differential expression analysis. 
- Volcano plot visualisation of the results list, highlighting the inflammatome genes; if many of the inflammatome genes are among the top hits, one can choose to interpret the results as being driven 
by inflammation; if the focus of the study is to understand more disease-specific processes, the inflammatome genes can be filtered out e.g. when selecting genes for further validation, biomarkers, drug targets, etc  

Input data:
- a table with results from differential expression/abundance analysis (e.g. limma, DESeq2, limma-voom, edgeR, etc) 
- the table should contain at least the following columns: gene/protein identifier, log2 fold change, p-value or adjusted p-value (FDR)

For GSEA analysis, we recommend sorting the genes by the test statistic (e.g. stat, t, etc) or log fold change. 

Gene/protein identifiers accepted: Ensembl, Entrez, gene symbol (HGNC), UniProt, RefSeq. The ids must be unique. 
Warning: if the data is transcript-level (e.g. RefSeq), with many transcript isoforms per gene, the data should be summarized to gene-level before using inflammatomeR.

Internal identifier mapping: IDs are mapped to Entrez IDs using org.Hs.eg.db (Bioconductor) and the bitr function from the clusterProfiler package (Bioconductor). 
When multiple IDs map to the same Entrez ID, the first one, alphabetically, is kept. 
#For a more refined mapping, press the "Refined ID mapping"" button, which allows to select the column containing mean expression value from the input data. 
#This way, the gene with highest expression value will be selected when multiple IDs map to the same Entrez ID. 
